Event basics (#265)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/9999-event-vision.md

# Event basics

## Motivation

The introduction of Events has been contentious, so we want to write down and agree on a few basics.

### What are events?

Events are a type of log which has a required event name and a specific structure which is implied by that event name.

The event name and its implied structure make events much more suitable for observability compared to traditional logs.

Because of this, the OpenTelemetry project wants to encourage the transition from traditional logs to events.

### OTLP

Since events are a type of log, they share the same OTLP data structure and OTLP pipeline.

### API

> OpenTelemetry should have an Event API. This will help to promote the distinction between events and traditional logs,
> and encourage the use of events over traditional logs.

Reviewer: nit, but I'd make it even stronger and add something like

```suggestion
OpenTelemetry should have an Event API. This will help to promote the distinction between events and traditional logs. We will recommend all new instrumentation authors to use Event API instead of traditional logs.
```

I hope it can help resolve any future questions around "what's the right way to report events or logs"

Author: I added this below under "Interoperability with traditional logs"

> and encourage the use of events over traditional logs.

Reviewer 2: 👍 

While I understand that its possible to use existing logging APIs to emit records shaped like OpenTelemetry events, I don't think it's good enough. User's would have to call logging APIs in a very specific way, and veering off course yields traditional logs which we want to discourage.

With a dedicated OpenTelemetry Event API, we ensure we control our own destiny. We can design an API exactly the way we see events, with no [impedance mismatch](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/impedance-mismatch-in-dbms/). We have a very clear API story - with first class user facing APIs for traces, metrics, and events (logs), all suitable for using directly in native instrumentation.

Author: I think I captured your points here in https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/265/commits/e9fce2245c1482225684a7cb33579460b6ecf5e0

It should be possible to send events from the Event API to a traditional logging library (e.g. Log4j).
This allows users to integrate events from the Event API into an existing (non-OpenTelemetry) log stream.

Note: If a user chooses to send events from the Event API to a traditional logging library, and they have
also chosen to send the logs from their traditional logging library to the OpenTelemetry Logging SDK, then they should
avoid sending events from the Event API directly to the OpenTelemetry Logging SDK since that would lead to duplicate
capture of events that were sent from the Event API.

It should be possible to bypass the Event API entirely and emit Events directly via an existing language-specific logging libraries.
This helps reinforce the idea that events are just a specific type of log.

Note: Because of this, generic event processors should be implemented as Log SDK processors.

### SDK

The Event SDK needs to support two destinations for events:

* OpenTelemetry Logging SDK
* Language-specific logging libraries

## Trade-offs and mitigations

TODO

## Prior art and alternatives

TODO

## Open questions

TODO

## Future possibilities

> TODO

Reviewer: I believe that eventually we will need to support some of the logging features in the Event API, such as:

- `IsEnabled` + filtering based on the level + scope name + maybe event name
- API ergonomics should be on par (but of course focused on structured events instead of strings)

To some extent we're going to re-create logging API (a better one) and there could be some controversy there. 
I'd like to discuss this overall direction and if there is a consensus, we should capture it.

Reviewer: Something like

> Events API will encourage emitting structured data and will provide convenience methods to make it easy to report events. It should also be able to replace traditional logging features such as recording human-readable messages along with the structured payload. 

For example, as a user, I should be able to do something like this

``` pseudo
var onSubmitEvent = new SubmitEvent(userId, orderId);
eventLogger.emit("my.company.project.onSubmitEvent", onSubmitEvent);
```

or, if I want this event to have human-readable description, for example, to be consumed by traditional logging system, I might want to do this:

``` pseudo
var onSubmit = new SubmitEvent(userId, orderId);
eventLogger.emit("my.company.project.onSubmit", onSubmit , "User {onSubmit.userId} submitted the order {onSubmit.orderId}");
```

I don't think specific examples are necessary in the text, I'm adding them to explain the point (that Event API should provide a reasonable replacement to logging API if we want users to use it for logging purposes).
